Release 1.6.0 (#1347)
ginkgo-project/ginkgo: CHANGELOG.md

Please visit our wiki [Changelog](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/wiki/Changelog) for unreleased changes.

## Version 1.6.0

The Ginkgo team is proud to announce the new Ginkgo minor release 1.6.0. This release brings new features such as:
- Several building blocks for GPU-resident sparse direct solvers like symbolic

>   and numerical LU and Cholesky factorization, symbolic Cholesky factorization,
>   numerical LU factorization, ...,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  and numerical LU and Cholesky factorization, ...,
```

- A distributed Schwarz preconditioner,
- New FGMRES and GCR solvers,
- Distributed benchmarks for the SpMV operation, solvers, ...
- Support for non-default streams in the CUDA and HIP backends,
- Mixed precision support for the CSR SpMV,
- A new profiler logger which integrates with NVTX, ROCTX, TAU and VTune to
  provide internal Ginkgo knowledge to most HPC profilers!

and much more.

If you face an issue, please first check our [known issues page](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/wiki/Known-Issues) and the [open issues list](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/issues) and if you do not find a solution, feel free to [open a new issue](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/issues/new/choose) or ask a question using the [github discussions](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/discussions).

Supported systems and requirements:
+ For all platforms, CMake 3.13+
+ C++14 compliant compiler
+ Linux and macOS
  + GCC: 5.5+
  + clang: 3.9+
  + Intel compiler: 2018+

>   + Apple LLVM: 8.0+

Author: No idea. Only mac users can answer this. We probably should check it manually or bump it.

>   + Apple LLVM: 8.0+

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I think we should just bump it. It is a pain to verify it as I think Apple forces you to install XCode for even specific Apple Clang versions, which is upwards of 10GB. In case someone is able to compile and run it on their machine for lower versions, then that is fine.

  + NVHPC: 22.7+
  + Cray Compiler: 14.0.1+
  + CUDA module: CUDA 9.2+ or NVHPC 22.7+
  + HIP module: ROCm 4.5+
  + DPC++ module: Intel OneAPI 2021.3+ with oneMKL and oneDPL. Set the CXX compiler to `dpcpp`.
+ Windows
  + MinGW: GCC 5.5+
  + Microsoft Visual Studio: VS 2019+
  + CUDA module: CUDA 9.2+, Microsoft Visual Studio
  + OpenMP module: MinGW.

### Version Support Changes
+ ROCm 4.0+ -> 4.5+ after [#1303](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1303)
+ Removed Cygwin pipeline and support [#1283](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1283)

### Interface Changes
+ Due to internal changes, `ConcreteExecutor::run` will now always throw if the corresponding module for the `ConcreteExecutor` is not build [#1234](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1234)

> + Changes the constructor of `experimental::distributed::Vector` to only accept local vectors as `std::unique_ptr` [#1284](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1284)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ The constructor of `experimental::distributed::Vector` was changed to only accept local vectors as `std::unique_ptr` [#1284](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1284)
```

> + Changes some default parameter for the `solver::MultiGrid`. In particular, the smoother defaults to one iteration of `Ir` with `Jacobi` preconditioner, and the coarse grid solver uses the new direct solver with LU factorization. [#1291](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1291) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ The default parameters for the `solver::MultiGrid` were improved. In particular, the smoother defaults to one iteration of `Ir` with `Jacobi` preconditioner, and the coarse grid solver uses the new direct solver with LU factorization. [#1291](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1291) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)
```

> + Adds a more expresive callback to the `iteration_complete` event and deprecates the old ones. [#1288](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1288) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ The `iteration_complete` event gained a more expressive overload with additional parameters, the old overloads were deprecated. [#1288](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1288) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)
```

> + The `iteration_complete` event gained a more expressive overload with additional parameters, the old overloads were deprecated. [#1288](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1288) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)

Reviewer 3: only 2 and 4 are interface changes but the others are behavior changes?

### Deprecations
+ Deprecated less expressive `iteration_complete` event. Users are advised to now implement the function `void iteration_complete(const LinOp* solver, const LinOp* b, const LinOp* x, const size_type& it, const LinOp* r, const LinOp* tau, const LinOp* implicit_tau_sq, const array<stopping_status>* status, bool stopped)` [#1288](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1288)

### Added Features
+ Added a distributed Schwarz preconditioner. [#1248](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1248)
+ Add GCR solver [#1239](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1239)
+ Flexible Gmres solver [#1244](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1244)

> + Enabled Gmres solver for distributed matrices and vectors [#1201](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1201)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ Enable Gmres solver for distributed matrices and vectors [#1201](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1201)
```

> + Example that uses Kokkos to assemble the matrix [#1216](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1216)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ An example that uses Kokkos to assemble the system matrix [#1216](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1216)
```

> + Symbolic LU factorization allowing the `gko::experimental::factorization::Lu` and `gko::experimental::solver::Direct` classes to be used for matrices with non-symmetric sparsity pattern [#1210](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1210)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ A symbolic LU factorization allowing the `gko::experimental::factorization::Lu` and `gko::experimental::solver::Direct` classes to be used for matrices with non-symmetric sparsity pattern [#1210](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1210)
```

> + Numerical Cholesky factorization [#1215](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1215)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
+ A numerical Cholesky factorization [#1215](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1215)
```

+ `ProfilerHook::created_(nested_)summary` allows the generation of a lightweight runtime profile over all Ginkgo functions written to a user-defined stream [#1270](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1270) for both host and device timing functionality [#1313](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1313)
+ It is now possible to enable host buffers for MPI communications at runtime even if the compile option `GINKGO_FORCE_GPU_AWARE_MPI` is set. [#1228](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1228)
+ A stencil matrices generator (5-pt, 7-pt, 9-pt, and 27-pt) for benchmarks [#1204](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1204)
+ Distributed benchmarks (multi-vector blas, spmv, solver) [#1204](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1204)
+ Benchmarks for CSR sorting and lookup [#1219](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1219)
+ A timer for MPI benchmarks that reports the longest time [#1217](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1217)

> + A `timer_method=min|max|average|median` for benchmark timing summary [#1294](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1294)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ A `timer_method=min|max|average|median` flag for benchmark timing summary [#1294](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1294)
```

+ Support for non-default streams in CUDA and HIP executors [#1236](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1236)
+ METIS integration for nested dissection reordering [#1296](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1296)
+ SuiteSparse AMD integration for fillin-reducing reordering [#1328](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1328)

> + Csr mixed-precision spmv support [#1319](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1319)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Csr mixed-precision SpMV support [#1319](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1319)
```

> + A `with_loggers` function to all `Factory` parameters [#1337](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1337)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ A `with_loggers` function for all `Factory` parameters [#1337](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1337)
```

Please visit our wiki [Changelog](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/wiki/Changelog) for unreleased changes.

## Version 1.6.0

The Ginkgo team is proud to announce the new Ginkgo minor release 1.6.0. This release brings new features such as:

> - Several building blocks for GPU-resident sparse direct solvers like the
>   symbolic Cholesky factorization, numerical LU factorization, ...,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Several building blocks for GPU-resident sparse direct solvers like
  symbolic and numerical LU and Cholesky factorization, ...,
```

- New FGMRES and GCR solvers,
- Distributed benchmarks for the SpMV operation, solvers, ...
- Support for non-default streams in the CUDA and HIP backends,
- A new profiler logger which integrates with NVTX, ROCTX, TAU and VTune to
  provide internal Ginkgo knowledge to most HPC profilers!

and much more.

If you face an issue, please first check our [known issues page](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/wiki/Known-Issues) and the [open issues list](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/issues) and if you do not find a solution, feel free to [open a new issue](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/issues/new/choose) or ask a question using the [github discussions](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/discussions).

Supported systems and requirements:
+ For all platforms, CMake 3.13+
+ C++14 compliant compiler
+ Linux and macOS
  + GCC: 5.5+
  + clang: 3.9+
  + Intel compiler: 2018+
  + Apple LLVM: 8.0+
  + NVHPC: 22.7+
  + Cray Compiler: 14.0.1+
  + CUDA module: CUDA 9.2+ or NVHPC 22.7+
  + HIP module: ROCm 4.5+

>   + DPC++ module: Intel OneAPI 2021.3 with oneMKL and oneDPL. Set the CXX compiler to `dpcpp`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  + DPC++ module: Intel OneAPI 2021.3+ with oneMKL and oneDPL. Set the CXX compiler to `dpcpp`.
```

+ Windows

>   + MinGW and Cygwin: GCC 5.5+
>   + Microsoft Visual Studio: VS 2019

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  + MinGW: GCC 5.5+
  + Microsoft Visual Studio: VS 2019+
```
I think we can also remove cygwin

  + CUDA module: CUDA 9.2+, Microsoft Visual Studio
  + OpenMP module: MinGW or Cygwin.

### Version Support Changes
+ ROCm 4.0+ -> 4.5+ after [#1303](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1303)

### Interface Changes
+ Due to internal changes, `ConcreteExecutor::run` will now always throw if the corresponding module for the `ConcreteExecutor` is not build [#1234](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1234)
+ Changes the constructor of `experimental::distributed::Vector` to only accept local vectors as `std::unique_ptr` [#1284](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1284)
+ Changes some default parameter for the `solver::MultiGrid`. In particular, the smoother default to on iteration of `Ir` with `Jacobi` preconditioner, and the coarse grid solver uses the new direct solver with LU factorization. [#1291](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1291) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)
+ Adds a more expresive callback to the `iteration_complete` event and deprecates the old ones. [#1288](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1288) [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)

### Deprecations

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

+ Deprecated less expressive `iteration_complete` event. Users are advised to now implement the function `void iteration_complete(const LinOp* solver, const LinOp* b, const LinOp* x, const size_type& it, const LinOp* r, const LinOp* tau, const LinOp* implicit_tau_sq, const array<stopping_status>* status, bool stopped)` [#1288](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1288)

### Added Features

> + Add a distributed Schwarz preconditioner. [#1248](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1248)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ Added a distributed Schwarz preconditioner. [#1248](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1248)
```

+ Flexible Gmres solver [#1244](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1244)
+ Enabled Gmres solver for distributed matrices and vectors [#1201](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1201)
+ Example that uses Kokkos to assemble the matrix [#1216](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1216)
+ Symbolic LU factorization allowing the `gko::experimental::factorization::Lu` and `gko::experimental::solver::Direct` classes to be used for matrices with non-symmetric sparsity pattern [#1210](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1210)
+ Numerical Cholesky factorization [#1215](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1215)

> + Add GCR solver [#1239](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1239)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ Added GCR solver [#1239](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1239)
```
because the others uses `added`. Or, change the others to `add`

+ Symbolic factorizations in host-side operations are now wrapped in a host-side `Operation` to make their execution visible to loggers. This means that profiling loggers and benchmarks are no longer missing a separate entry for their runtime [#1232](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1232)
+ Symbolic factorization benchmark [#1302](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1302)
+ The `ProfilerHook` logger allows annotating the Ginkgo execution (apply, operations, ...) for profiling frameworks like NVTX, ROCTX and TAU. [#1055](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1055)
+ `ProfilerHook::created_(nested_)summary` allows the generation of a lightweight runtime profile over all Ginkgo functions written to a user-defined stream [#1270](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1270) for both host and device timing functionality [#1313](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1313)
+ It is now possible to enable host buffers for MPI communications at runtime even if the compile option `GINKGO_FORCE_GPU_AWARE_MPI` is set. [#1228](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1228)

> + Enables using generated stencil matrices (5-pt, 7-pt, 9-pt, and 27-pt) for benchmarks [#1204](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1204)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Added generator for stencil matrices (5-pt, 7-pt, 9-pt, and 27-pt) to benchmarks [#1204](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1204)
```

+ Added distributed benchmarks (multi-vector blas, spmv, solver) [#1204](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1204)
+ Added benchmarks for CSR sorting and lookup [#1219](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1219)
+ Added timer for MPI benchmarks that reports the longest time [#1217](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1217)
+ Added support for non-default streams in CUDA and HIP executors [#1236](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1236)

> + Added different timer statistical method for output [#1294](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1294)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Added ´-timer_method=min|max|average|median` for benchmark timing summary [#1294](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1294)
```

+ Added METIS integration for nested dissection reordering [#1296](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1296)
+ Added SuiteSparse AMD integration for fillin-reducing reordering [#1328](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1328)

> + Added Csr mixed spmv support [#1319](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1319)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Added Csr mixed-precision spmv support [#1319](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1319)
```

### Improvements
+ Improve naming of kernel operations for loggers [#1277](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1277)
+ Annotate solver iterations in `ProfilerHook` [#1290](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1290)
+ Allow passing smart pointers in place of raw pointers to most matrix functions. This means that things like `vec->compute_norm2(x.get())` or `vec->compute_norm2(lend(x))` can be simplified to `vec->compute_norm2(x)` [#1279](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1279) [#1261](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1261)
+ Catch overflows in prefix sum operations, which makes Ginkgo's operations much less likely to crash. This also improves the performance of the prefix sum kernel [#1303](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1303)
+ Make the installed GinkgoConfig.cmake file relocatable and follow more best practices [#1325](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1325)
+ Allow using the profiler hooks and inline input strings in benchmarks [#1342](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1342)

### Fixes

> + Fix the wrong type and pass real-number value with device_type to devices [#1253](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1253)

Reviewer: This only seems relevant to Ginkgo developers, maybe we should remove it?

+ Fix OpenMPI version check [#1200](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1200)

> + Fix hwloc related slowdown in MPI applications [#1230](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1230)

Reviewer: I think we can be more explicit: 
```suggestion
+ Disable thread pinning with GPU executors due to poor performance [#1230](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1230)
```

+ Fix hwloc version detection [#1266](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1266)

> + Fix PAPI detection is non-implicit include directories [#1268](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1268)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
+ Fix PAPI detection in non-implicit include directories [#1268](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1268)
```

+ Fix PAPI support for newer PAPI versions: [#1321](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1321)
+ Fix pkg-config file generation for library paths outside prefix [#1271](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1271)
+ Fix build failures with ROCm 5.4 due to missing Thrust includes [#1214](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1214)
+ Fix build failures with CUDA 12 due to deprecated functionality [#1235](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1235)

> + Fix build failures with OneAPI 6 due to changed namespace structure [#1251](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1251)

Reviewer: I think we could group those together

+ Fix runtime failures for one-sided MPI wrapper functions observed on some OpenMPI versions [#1249](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1249)
+ Fix incorrect read for skew-symmetric MatrixMarket files with explicit diagonal entries [#1272](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1272)
+ Fix handling of missing diagonal entries in symbolic factorizations [#1263](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1263)
+ Fix segmentation fault in benchmark matrix construction [#1299](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1299)
+ Fix the mpi cxx type binding by c binding [#1306](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1306)
+ Fix the additional residual check in IR [#1307](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1307)

> + Fix the cuSPARSE CSR SpMM issue on single strided vector when SM >= 70 and cuda >= 11.6 [#1322](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1322)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
+ Fix the cuSPARSE CSR SpMM issue on single strided vector when cuda >= 11.6 [#1322](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1322) [#1331](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1331)
```
SM < 70 is failed at cuda >= 11.7 though

Reviewer: @tcojean This one still needs to be addressed

+ Fix the stencil matrix creation for benchmarking [#1305](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1305)
+ Fix Isai generation for large sparsity powers [#1327](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1327)
+ Fix Ginkgo compilation and test with NVHPC >= 22.7 [#1331](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1331)

### CI-related
+ Remove our own gitlab status update [#1231](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1231)

> + Add wiki check [#1218](https://github.com/ginkgo-project/ginkgo/pull/1218)

Reviewer: those two don't seem relevant to users?
